# Kernel Modules

One of the great things about the π is the ability to hack at the lowest levels, and break something which doesn't matter. In addition to exploring bare metal on BCM2835, also started to look at writing kernel modules, since that is the usual MO for interfacing to hardware.

Spoiler: the kernel makes this harder, because its job is to stop you from messing with hardware. This is fine, but meant that the writing of a new kernel module was something of a learning curve. As such, work with something with which I am already familiar, GPCLK as per [previous user space investigations](../07/2023-07-04.md).

## Kernel Basics

In UNIX everything is a file, so if you want to expose a device, you create a file to do so. The file in this case lives under `/dev`, and wants to expose a clock divider register - I will assume that the clock has been set up as per the data sheet in advance (I used the user space program from before).

Device file needs to deal with four ideas:

- activity when opened
- activity when released (closed)
- action on read
- action on write

These four functions are essentially what defines the minimal functionality exposed by a character device. The API for these (i.e. stubs) is well documented, but the _behaviour_ expected from these is less well documented. That behaviour _matters_. You also need two other stub functions, to `init` and `exit` the kernel module (i.e. routines which are executed on load and unload).

## Memory

Obviously for something like an ARM based SoC everything is accessed by specific memory addresses - in the most basic sense the job of the kernel is to map the machine hardware to a set of predictable locations in a process memory space, and to prevent one program from clobbering another. In our case, we want to access memory which is shared by other devices / programs / whatever so need to think about accessing the right space. In kernel terms, this involves _mapping_ the memory from the bus address that the CPU sees to the right address for access from a kernel module: this is done with `ioremap` and `iounmap` - former to perform the mapping, latter to release it. The hardware address of the hardware depends on the specific revision of π - in my case, working on π0 for this where we have 512MB of RAM, the base address is one byte above i.e. `#define GPCLK_ADDR 0x20101070`. In the data sheet this is listed with prefix `0x7E`.

The map process is used to make a chunk of memory available to the kernel address space - takes a `void *` and number of bytes, returns a `void *` which can be used to dereference those bytes. In the implementation I chose to do this in the `open` / `release` methods:

```c
static void *clk_addr;

static int clk_open(struct inode *i, struct file *f) {
  printk("gpclk open\n");
  clk_addr = ioremap(GPCLK_ADDR, 2 * sizeof(unsigned int));
  return 0;
}

static int clk_release(struct inode *i, struct file *f) {
  printk("gpclk close\n");
  iounmap(clk_addr);
  return 0;
}
```

N.B. here `clk_addr` is simply a pointer to the start of the address space: any arithmatic on this will need to be done manually, unless it is cast to a `uint32_t` (which would seem a totally reasonable option). At this point, the `clk_addr` pointer can be treated from within the kernel code exactly as if it was just pointing at the registers (which it is).

The other memory-side matter here is that the data being read and written are from _user_ space, while the kernel is obviously working in kernel space, and never the twain shall meet. Accordingly, some care is needed to copy the pertinent data from user to kernel space in the write, and vice versa in the read. This is achieved with:

```c
error = copy_to_user(buf, msg, len);
error = copy_from_user(msg, buf, len);
```

where the `error` here is the number of bytes which were _not_ read or written, i.e. the answer should be zero. I did not add a handler for non-zero... should do really.

## Device File I/O

This is the "simple bit" except really it isn't - the function specifications are not really written anywhere, and you effectively need to think of this as being on the _other side_ of the UNIX `read()` and `write()` function calls: for example with reading it is up to you to generate the `EOF` signal.

Effectively we have the `open` and `release` calls defined above, then read and write. Read is for _output to user space_. Write is for _input from user space_. In this case `cat /dev/gpclk` (as will be my device name) is reading data out from the device, so we need to provide that data. The function signatures are the same:

```
static ssize_t clk_read(struct file *f, char __user *buf, size_t len, loff_t *off);
static ssize_t clk_write(struct file *f, const char __user *buf, size_t len, loff_t *off);
```

In each case we return the number of bytes read / written, as well as advancing the file pointer. EOF is indicated by resetting the file pointer (I don't know if this was needed?) and returning zero, so every read will be performed by at least two calls to `clk_read()`, to get the end of file indicator. Beyond this it is a `sprintf` / `sscanf` to get the values into the buffer, and the copy command as posed above.

## Combination / Registration
